We have developed a number of system-level techniques for analyzing and
designing electronic systems under the uncertainty stemming from the fabrication
process, workload, and aging. The features that are common to the proposed
techniques are generality and straightforwardness of application.

In \cref{certainty-development}, we have elaborated on the Utopian deterministic
scenario, which has served as an adequate starting point for the subsequent
developments. We have presented an auxiliary transformation of the temperature
model that simplifies certain operations associated with temperature
calculations. Furthermore, we have proposed a novel approach to dynamic
steady-state power and temperature analysis. Since our technique is both
accurate and fast, it can readily be utilized inside intensive
design-space-exploration loops, which has been illustrated by undertaking
reliability optimization.

In \cref{uncertainty-process-fabrication}, we have considered the variability
that is induced by process variation on process parameters across silicon
wafers. In this context, we have presented a versatile statistical framework for
inferring the aforementioned variability by means of indirect measurements,
which can potentially be incomplete and corrupted by noise. The ability to work
with such measurements implies low costs, since there is no need for deploying
any specialized test structures, or only a small subset of test equipment might
need to be engaged.

In \cref{uncertainty-process-development}, we have presented a methodology for
studying diverse system-level quantities that are of interest to the designer,
but that are also uncertain due to process variation. Examples include transient
and dynamic steady-state power and temperature profiles of the system under
consideration as well as the system's maximum temperature and total energy
consumption. Our approach treats the quantity under analysis as an opaque
object---and hence is flexible and easy to apply---and delivers a surrogate for
this object that allows the designer to computationally efficiently estimate
various probabilistic characteristics of this quantity. The efficiency makes the
proposed technique suitable for exploring the design space. This has been
demonstrated in the context of energy optimization with reliability-related
constraints, in which reliability analysis has been enhanced to consider process
uncertainty.

In \cref{uncertainty-workload-development}, we have developed another technique
for probabilistic analysis of system-level quantities that are of interest to
the designer. In this case, we have striven to provide an adequate
characterization of the variability that originates from workload. This
variability tends to be less regular than the one stemming from the fabrication
process and, therefore, necessitates a separate treatment. The presented
approach allows the designer to analyze such important quantities end-to-end
delays, energy consumption, and peak temperatures subject to workload variation.
It has been demonstrated that, for a fixed budget of evaluations of the quantity
under consideration, our technique achieves higher accuracy compared to the one
delivered by direct sampling.

In \cref{uncertainty-workload-operation}, we have elaborated on the mitigation
of workload uncertainty at runtime in the context of resource management.
Specifically, we have performed an early investigation of the applicability of
advanced prediction techniques from the field of machine learning to the problem
of fine-grained long-range forecasting of resource usage in large computer
systems. The results indicate that the real-life data which have been studied
possess certain regularities, and that these regularities can be modeled by
advanced machine-learning techniques and thereby utilized for making sensible
predictions.
