The key building block of our solutions developed in the subsequent section is
the uncertainty quantification technique presented in this section. The task of
this technique is to propagate the uncertainty through the system, from a set of
inputs to a set of outputs. The inputs are the uncertain parameters \vu, and the
outputs are the quantities that we are interested in studying. The former can
be, for instance, the effective channel length, gate oxide thickness, and
threshold voltage, and the latter can be, for instance, the temperature profile,
energy consumption, and maximum temperature of the system.

Due to the inherent complexity, uncertainty-quantification problems are
typically viewed as approximation problems: one constructs a computationally
efficient surrogate for the system under consideration and then studies this
light representation instead of the original system. In order to construct such
a surrogate, we appeal to the \ac{PC} decomposition described in
\sref{polynomial-chaos}.

\subsection{Probability Transformation}
\slab{chaos-probability-transformation}

Independence is required by \ac{PC} expansions. In general, however, the \nu
individual variables in $\vu: \Omega \to \real^\nu$ are dependent. Therefore,
our foremost task is to transform \vu into mutually independent random variables
in order to fulfill the requirement. To this end, an adequate probability
transformation should be undertaken depending on the available information; see
\cite{eldred2008} for an overview. Denote such a transformation by $\vu =
\transform{\vz}$ where $\vz: \Omega \to \real^\nz$ is a random vector with \nz
mutually independent components.

Correlated random variables can be transformed into linearly uncorrelated ones
via the \ac{KL} decomposition given in \eref{karhunen-loeve}. If, in addition,
the correlated variables form a Gaussian vector, the uncorrelated ones are also
mutually independent. In the general case (non-Gaussian), the most prominent
solutions to attain independence are the Rosenblatt \cite{rosenblatt1952} and
Nataf transformations \cite{liu1986}. Rosenblatt's approach is suitable when the
joint distribution function of \vu is known; however, such information is rarely
available. A set of marginal distributions and a correlation matrix are more
likely to be given, which are already sufficient for the Nataf transformation.
See \sref{probability-transformation} for more detail.

Apart from the extraction of the independent variables \vz, an essential
operation at this stage is model order reduction since the number of stochastic
dimensions---that is, the dimensionality of \vz---directly impacts the
complexity of the rest of the computations. This operation is often treated as a
part of the \ac{KL} decomposition, which is also covered in
\sref{probability-transformation}.

\subsection{Surrogate Model}

Let $\g: \Omega \to \real$ be a quantity of interest dependent on \vu. For
convenience, \g is assumed to be one-dimensional, which will be generalized
later on. In order to give a computationally efficient probabilistic
characterization of \g, we utilize nonintrusive spectral decompositions based on
orthogonal polynomials. The corresponding mathematical foundation is outlined in
\sref{spectral-decomposition} and \sref{numerical-integration}, and here we go
directly to the main results obtained in those sections.

\subsubsection{Isotropic Decomposition}

Assume $\g \in \L{2}(\Omega, \mathcal{F}, \probability)$ (see
\sref{preliminaries}). Then \g can be expanded into the following series:
\[
  \g \approx \chaos{\nz}{\lc}{\g} := \sum_{\multiindex \in
  \multiindices{\nz}{\lc}} \hat{\g}_{\multiindex} \, \phi_{\multiindex}(\vz)
\]
where \lc is the expansion level; $\multiindex = (\alpha_i) \in \natural^\nz$ is
a multi-index; $\multiindices{\nz}{\lc}$ is an index set to be discussed
shortly; and $\phi_{\multiindex}(\vz)$ is an \nz-variate Hermite polynomial
constructed as a product of normalized one-dimensional Hermite polynomials of
orders specified by the corresponding elements of \multiindex.

As discussed in \sref{spectral-decomposition}, each coefficient
$\hat{\g}_{\multiindex}$ in \eref{spectral-decomposition} is an
$\nz$-dimensional integral of the product of \g with $\phi_{\multiindex}$, and
this integral should be computed numerically. To this end, we construct a
quadrature rule and calculate $\hat{\g}_{\multiindex}$ as
\begin{equation} \elab{numerical-integration}
  \hat{\g}_{\multiindex} \approx \quadrature{\nz}{\lq}{\g \,
  \phi_{\multiindex}} := \sum_{i = 1}^\nq \g(\transform{\v{x}_i}) \, \phi_{\multiindex}(\v{x}_i) \, w_i
\end{equation}
where $\lq$ is the quadrature level, and $\{ (\v{x}_i \in \real^\nz, w_i \in
\real) \}_{i = 1}^\nq$ are the points and weights of the quadrature. The
multivariate quadrature operator $\quadrature{\nz}{\lq}$ is based on a set of
univariate operators and is constructed as follows:
\begin{equation} \elab{smolyak-sparse-grid}
  \quadrature{\nz}{\lq} = \bigoplus_{\multiindex \in \multiindices{\nz}{\lq}}
  \Delta_{\alpha_1} \otimes \cdots \otimes \Delta_{\alpha_\nz}.
\end{equation}
The notation used in the above equation is not essential for the present
discussion and is explained in \sref{numerical-integration}. The important
aspect to note is the structure of this operator, namely, the index set
$\multiindices{\nz}{\lq}$, which we shall come back to shortly.

The standard choice of $\multiindices{\nz}{\lc}$ in
\eref{spectral-decomposition} is $\{ \multiindex: \norm[1]{\multiindex} \leq \lc
\}$, which is called an isotropic total-order index set. \emph{Isotropic} refers
to the fact that all dimensions are trimmed identically, and \emph{total-order}
refers to the structure of the corresponding polynomial space. In
\eref{numerical-integration}, $\phi_{\multiindex}$ is a polynomial of total
order at most \lc, and \g is modeled as such a polynomial. Hence, the integrand
in \eref{numerical-integration} is a polynomial of total order at most $2 \lc$.
Having this aspect in mind, one usually constructs a quadrature rule such that
it is exact for polynomials of total order $2 \lc$ \cite{eldred2008}. In this
work, we employ Gaussian quadratures for integration, in which case a quadrature
of level $\lq$ is exact for integrating polynomials of total order $2 \lq + 1$
\cite{heiss2008} (see also \sref{numerical-integration}). Therefore, it is
sufficient to keep \lc and \lq equal. More generally, the index sets
$\multiindices{\nz}{\lc}$ and $\multiindices{\nz}{\lq}$ should be synchronized;
in what follows, we shall denote both by $\multiindices{\nz}{l}$.

Since we are interested in integration with respect to the standard Gaussian
measure over $\real^\nz$, we shall rely on the Gauss--Hermite family of
quadrature rules \cite{maitre2010}, which is a subset of a broader family known
as Gaussian quadratures.

For the Gauss--Hermite quadrature rules in one dimension, we have that $\nq =
\lq + 1$ and the precision is $2 \nq - 1$ \cite{heiss2008} or, equivalently, $2
\lq + 1$, which is a remarkable property of Gaussian quadratures. The resulting
sparse grid is exact for polynomials with a total order up to $2 \lq + 1$, which
is analogous to integration in one dimension.

\subsubsection{Anisotropic Decomposition}

In the context of sparse grids, an important generalization of the construction
in \eref{smolyak-sparse-grid} is the so-called anisotropic Smolyak algorithm
\cite{nobile2008}. The main difference between the isotropic and anisotropic
versions lies in the constraints imposed on $\multiindices{\nz}{l}$. An
anisotropic total-order index set is defined as follows:
\begin{equation} \elab{anisotropic-total-order-index-set}
  \multiindices{\nz}{l} = \left\{ \multiindex: \innerproduct{\v{c}}{\multiindex} \leq l \, \min_i c_i \right\}
\end{equation}
where $\v{c} = (c_i) \in \real^\nz$, $c_i \geq 0$, is a vector assigning
importance coefficients to each dimension, and $\innerproduct{\cdot}{\cdot}$ is
the standard inner product on $\real^\nz$. Equation
\eref{anisotropic-total-order-index-set} plugged into \eref{smolyak-sparse-grid}
results in a sparse grid which is exact for the polynomial space that is
tailored using the same index set.

The above approach allows one to leverage the highly anisotropic behaviors
inherent for many practical problems \cite{nobile2008}. It provides a great
control over the computational time associated with the construction of spectral
decompositions: a carefully chosen importance vector $\v{c}$ in
\eref{anisotropic-total-order-index-set} can significantly reduce the number of
polynomial terms in \eref{spectral-decomposition} and the number of quadrature
points needed in \eref{numerical-integration} to compute the coefficients of
those terms. The question to discuss now is the choice of $\v{c}$. In this
regard, we rely on the variance contributions of the dimensions given by
$\v{\lambda}$ in \eref{dimension-contribution}. Specifically, we let
\begin{equation} \elab{dimension-anisotropy}
  \v{c} = \v{\lambda}^\gamma := (\lambda_i^\gamma)_{i = 1}^\nz
\end{equation}
where $\gamma \in [0, 1]$ is a tuning parameter. The isotropic scenario can be
recovered by setting $\gamma = 0$; the other values of $\gamma$ correspond to
various levels of anisotropy with the maximum attained by setting $\gamma = 1$.

Let us sum up what we have achieved at this point. In order to give a
probabilistic characterization of a quantity of interest, we perform polynomial
expansions as shown in \eref{spectral-decomposition}. The coefficients of such
expansions are evaluated by means of Gaussian quadratures as shown in
\eref{numerical-integration}. The quadratures are constructed using the Smolyak
formula given in \eref{smolyak-sparse-grid}. The index sets used in both
\eref{spectral-decomposition} and \eref{smolyak-sparse-grid} are the one given
in \eref{anisotropic-total-order-index-set} wherein the anisotropic weights are
set according to \eref{dimension-contribution} and \eref{dimension-anisotropy}.

\subsubsection{Efficient Implementation}

The pair of \vz and $\v{c}$ uniquely characterizes the uncertainty
quantification problem at hand. Once they have been identified, and the desired
approximation level $l = \lc = \lq$ has been specified, the corresponding
polynomial basis and quadrature stay the same for all quantities that one might
be interested in studying. This observation is of high importance as a lot of
preparatory work can and should be done only once and then stored for future
uses. In particular, the construction in \eref{spectral-decomposition} can be
reduced to one matrix multiplication with a precomputed matrix, which we shall
demonstrate next.

Let $\nc = \cardinality{\multiindices{\nz}{l}}$ be the cardinality of
$\multiindices{\nz}{l}$, which is also the number of polynomial terms and,
hence, coefficients in \eref{spectral-decomposition}. Assume the multi-indices
contained in $\multiindices{\nz}{l}$ are arranged in a vector
$(\multiindex_i)_{i = 1}^\nc$, which gives a certain ordering. Now, let
\[
  \Pi = \big( \pi_{ij} = \phi_{\multiindex_i}(\v{x}_j) \, w_j \big)_{i = 1, \, j = 1}^{i = \nc, \, j = \nq},
\]
that is, $\pi_{ij}$ is the polynomial corresponding to the $i$th multi-index
evaluated at the $j$th quadrature point and multiplied by the $j$th quadrature
weight. We refer to $\Pi$ as the projection matrix. The coefficients in
\eref{spectral-decomposition} can now be computed as
\[
  \hat{\v{v}} = \Pi \, \v{v}
\]
where
\[
  \hat{\v{v}} = (\hat{\g}_i)_{i = 1}^\nc \hspace{1em} \text{and} \hspace{1em}
  \v{v} = \big(\g(\transform{\v{x}_i}) \big)_{i = 1}^\nq.
\]
It can be seen that \eref{coefficient-evaluation} is a matrix version of
\eref{numerical-integration}. $\Pi$ is the one that should be precomputed. The
pseudocode of the procedure is given in \aref{surrogate-construction} wherein
Algorithm~X stands for the routine that calculates \g for a given \vu. Needless
to say, Algorithm~X is problem specific and has a crucial impact on the
performance of the whole procedure presented in this section: any modeling
errors inherent to this algorithm can propagate to the output of the uncertainty
analysis. Algorithm~X will be further discussed in
\sref{temperature-analysis}--\sref{reliability-optimization}.

\subsection{Post-Processing}

The function given by \eref{spectral-decomposition} is nothing more than a
polynomial; hence, it is easy to interpret and easy to evaluate. Consequently,
having constructed such an expansion, various statistics about \g can be
estimated with little effort. Moreover, \eref{spectral-decomposition} yields
analytical formulae for the expected value and variance of \g solely based on
the coefficients of \eref{spectral-decomposition}:
\[
  \expectation{\g} = \hat{\g}_{\v{0}} \hspace{1em} \text{and} \hspace{1em}
  \variance{\g} = \sum_{\multiindex \in \multiindices{\nz}{l} \setminus \{ \v{0} \}} \hat{\g}_{\multiindex}^2
\]
where $\v{0} = (0)$ is a multi-index with all entries equal to zero. Such
quantities as the cumulative distribution and probability density functions can
be estimated by sampling \eref{spectral-decomposition}; each sample is a trivial
evaluation of a polynomial.

\begin{remark}
When \g is multidimensional, we shall consider it as a row vector with an
appropriate number of elements. Then all the operations with respect to \g, such
as those in \eref{spectral-decomposition}, \eref{numerical-integration}, and
\eref{probabilistic-moments}, should be undertaken elementwise. In
\eref{coefficient-evaluation}, \eref{quantity-evaluation}, and
\aref{surrogate-construction}, $\v{v}$ and $\hat{\v{v}}$ are to be treated as
matrices with \nc rows, and $\g_i$ as a row vector. The output of Algorithm~X is
assumed to be automatically reshaped into a row vector.
\end{remark}

In what follows, we shall apply the probabilistic analysis developed in this
section to a number of concrete problems: temperature analysis
(\sref{temperature-analysis}), reliability analysis
(\sref{reliability-analysis}), and reliability optimization
(\sref{reliability-optimization}).
