\inputfigure{chaos-motivation}
Consider a quad-core architecture whose leakage current is uncertain to the
designer due to its dependence on a number of process parameters that are
affected by process variation. Assume first that these parameters have nominal
values. We can then simulate the system under a certain workload and observe the
corresponding temperature profile. The result is depicted in
\fref{chaos-motivation} by a blue line, which corresponds to the temperature of
one of the processing elements; the experimental setup will be detailed in
\sref{chaos-transient-application} and \sref{chaos-transient-results}. Note that
the temperature is always below \celsius{90}. Let us now assume a mild deviation
in the parameters from their nominal values in the direction that causes the
leakage current to be higher, and let us perform temperature analysis once
again. The result is the orange line in \fref{chaos-motivation}; the maximum
temperature is approaching \celsius{100}. Finally, we repeat the experiment
considering a severe deviation in the parameters in the same direction and
observe the green line in \fref{chaos-motivation}; in this case, the maximum
temperature is almost \celsius{110}.

Suppose now that the designer is tuning a solution constrained by a maximum
temperature of \celsius{90}, and that the designer is guided exclusively by the
nominal values of the process parameters. In this scenario, even with mild
deviations, the electrical circuits might be burnt. Another path that the
designer might take is to design the system for severe conditions. This
scenario, however, could easily lead to a system that is too conservative and
overdesigned.

The conclusion drawn from the example given above is that the presence of
uncertainty has to be adequately addressed in order to pursue efficiency and
robustness. Nevertheless, the majority of the literature related to power,
temperature, and reliability analysis of electronic systems ignores this
important aspect; see, for instance, \cite{rao2009, yang2010, rai2011,
thiele2011, pagani2014}. This negligence is also present in the analysis and
optimization described in \cref{certainty-development}. Therefore, the goal of
this chapter is to eliminate this concern in the case of process variation.
