In this section, we consider a particular application of the proposed approach
to probabilistic transient analysis presented in \sref{chaos-transient-analysis}
in order to illustrate its usage in practice. We begin by describing the
scenario being considered.

\subsection{\problemtitle}

At Stage~1 in \fref{chaos-overview}, the quantity of interest \g is the
transient power and temperature profiles corresponding to a given workload. Let
us now specify the parameters \vu that make \g uncertain to the designer of the
system.

As discussed in \sref{power-model}, the total dissipation of power is composed
of two major components: dynamic and static. The influence of process variation
on dynamic power is known to be negligibly small \cite{srivastava2010}; on the
other hand, the variability of static power is substantial, with the
subthreshold leakage current contributing the most \cite{juan2011, juan2012}.
With this in mind, we focus our attention on the subthreshold leakage and, more
specifically, on the effective channel length, which is denoted by \u, since it
has the strongest influence on this leakage (including its impact on other
important parameters such as the threshold voltage) and is severely deteriorated
by process variation \cite{chandrakasan2000}.

\inputfigure{chaos-beta-gaussian}
It is well known that the dispersion of the effective channel length around its
nominal value resembles the bell shape of Gaussian distributions. Therefore,
such variations are often conveniently modeled using Gaussian random variables
\cite{bhardwaj2006, ghanta2006, huang2009a, shen2009, chandra2010,
srivastava2010, juan2011, juan2012, lee2013}. Due to the underlying physics and
for demonstration purposes, we take a step further and embed into the model the
fact that the effective channel length---occupying the space between the drain
and source of a transistor---cannot be arbitrarily large or take negative
values, which Gaussian distributions allow it to do. In other words, we require
the model of \u to have a bounded support. To this end, we propose to model the
effective channel length and other physically bounded parameters using the
four-parameter family of beta distributions as
\begin{equation} \elab{beta-distribution}
  \u \sim \mathrm{Beta}(a, b, c, d)
\end{equation}
where $a$ and $b$ are the shape parameters, and $c$ and $d$ are the left and
right bounds of the support, respectively. The parameters $a$ and $b$ can be
chosen so that the frequently observed bell shape is preserved. An illustration
is given in \fref{chaos-beta-gaussian} where a beta distribution is fitted to
the standard Gaussian distribution; alternatively, one can match probabilistic
moments. It can be seen that the curves are nearly indistinguishable; however,
the beta one has a bounded support $[-4, 4]$, which can potentially lead to more
realistic models.

The variability of \u is split into global and local parts \cite{shen2009,
chandra2010, juan2012}, which are denoted by $\u_\overall$ and $\u_\local$,
respectively. The former can be treated as a composition of inter-lot,
inter-wafer, and inter-die variations, and the latter as a composition of
intra-die variations. The variability $\u_\overall$ is assumed to be shared by
all the \np processing elements, whereas each processing element is assumed to
have its own local parameter $\u_{\local, i}$. The effective channel length of
processing element~$i$ is then modeled using the following formula:
\[
  \u_i = \u_\nominal + \u_\overall + \u_{\local, i}
\]
where $\u_\nominal$ is the nominal value of the effective channel length.
Consequently, the uncertain parameters of the problem are
\[
  \vu = (\u_{\local, 1}, \dotsc, \u_{\local, \np}, \u_\overall): \Omega \to \real^{\np + 1}.
\]

Global variations are typically assumed to be uncorrelated with respect to the
local ones. The latter, however, are known to have high spatial correlations.
Similarly to the treatment in \cref{uncertainty-process-fabrication}, we model
these correlations using the composite correlation function given in
\eref{bayes-correlation}, which is inspired by the variation patterns induced by
the fabrication process \cite{friedberg2005, chandrakasan2000, cheng2011}.
Specifically, the correlation function imposes similarities between those
locations on the die that are close to each other as well as between those
locations that are at the same distance from the center of the die; see also
\cite{ghanem1991, ghanta2006, bhardwaj2008, huang2009a, lee2013}.

Although \eref{bayes-correlation} captures certain features that are
characteristic of the fabrication process, it is still an idealization. In
practice, it can be difficult to make a justifiable choice and tune such a
formula, which is a prerequisite for techniques based on the continuous \ac{KL}
decomposition, such as those discussed in \sref{chaos-past}. A correlation
matrix, on the other hand, can be readily estimated from measurements and thus
is a more probable input to probabilistic analysis. Hence, we use
\eref{bayes-correlation} for the sole purpose of constructing a correlation
matrix of $\set{\u_{\local, i}}_{i = 1}^\np$. For convenience, this correlation
matrix is extended by one dimension in order to accommodate $\u_\overall$ along
with $\set{\u_{\local, i}}_{i = 1}^\np$. Thus, the matrix acquires one
additional nonzero diagonal element equal to unity; the resulting matrix is the
correlation matrix of \vu denoted by $\correlation{\vu}$.

Let us now be more specific about the power model in \eref{chaos-power-model}.
In the ongoing scenario, \f can be rewritten as the following summation:
\[
  \f(i, \vq, \vu) = \f_\dynamic(i) + \f_\static(\vq, \vu)
\]
where $\f_\dynamic: \natural[+] \to \real^\np$ and $\f_\static: \real^\np \times
\real^\nu \to \real^\np$. Without loss of generality, the dynamic component
$\f_\dynamic$ is assumed to be given as a dynamic power profile (recall
\eref{power-profile}) denoted by $\mp_\dynamic$. Similarly to
\sref{bayes-results}, the modeling of the static component $\f_\static$ is based
on \up{SPICE} simulations of a reference electrical circuit composed of
\up{BSIM4} devices \cite{bsim} configured according to the 45-nm \up{PTM}
\up{HP} model \cite{ptm}; specifically, we use a series of \up{CMOS} invertors.
The simulations are performed with respect to a sufficiently wide fine-grained
two-dimensional grid---the effective channel length against temperature---and
the results are tabulated. An interpolation technique is then utilized whenever
it is necessary to calculate $\f_\static$ at a point within the range of the
grid.

Lastly, in order to be able to perform temperature calculations, an adequate
thermal \up{RC} circuit should be constructed. Given the specification of the
platform under consideration---including the floorplan of the die and the
configuration of the thermal package---this circuit is obtained by means of
HotSpot \cite{skadron2003}. The structure of the circuit is the one described in
\sref{temperature-model}.

To conclude, in this section, we address the variability of the effective
channel length. The input to our analysis is composed of the marginal
distributions of the uncertain parameters \vu, which are beta distributions, and
the corresponding correlation matrix $\correlation{\vu}$. Let us now go over the
other stages of our methodology presented in \sref{chaos-uncertainty-analysis}
and depicted in \fref{chaos-overview}.

\subsection{Probability Transformation}

At Stage~2 in \fref{chaos-overview}, \vu should be processed in order to extract
a vector of mutually independent random variables \vz via a suitable
transformation $\transform$; see \eref{chaos-transformation}. Following the
guidance given in \sref{chaos-transformation}, the most apposite $\transform$ in
the ongoing scenario is the Nataf transformation. The whole procedure is
described in detail in \xref{probability-transformation} and can be seen in
\eref{probability-transformation}.

Using this specific $\transform$, arbitrary marginal distributions can be
prescribed for \vz. There are no restrictions in this regard as long as a
suitable polynomial basis can be constructed, which is discussed in
\sref{chaos-construction}. We let \vz have beta distributions, keeping \vu and
\vz in the same family of distributions.

Since the number of stochastic dimensions, which is $\nu = \np + 1$ in the case
of \vu, directly impacts the computational cost of \ac{PC} expansions, which is
noted in \sref{chaos-construction}, one should consider the possibility of model
order reduction before constructing these expansions. Therefore, the reduction
procedure described in \xref{probability-transformation} in connection with
$\transform$ is assumed to be engaged in this transformation. The reduced
dimensionality is denoted by \nz.

\subsection{Surrogate Construction}

At Stage~3 in \fref{chaos-overview}, the uncertain parameters, power model, and
temperature model developed in the previous subsections are to be fused together
under the desired workload $\mp_\dynamic$ in order to produce the corresponding
stochastic power and temperature profiles denoted by \mp and \mq, respectively.

In the current scenario, the construction of \ac{PC} expansions is based on the
Jacobi polynomial basis, since it is preferable in situations involving
beta-distributed parameters \cite{xiu2010}. To give a concrete example, for a
dual-core platform ($\np = 2$) with two stochastic dimensions ($\nz = 2$), the
second-level \ac{PC} expansion ($\lc = 2$) of temperature at time step~$i$ is as
follows:
\begin{equation} \elab{chaos-expansion-example}
  \begin{split}
    \chaos{2}{2}{\vq_i}
    =    {} & \hat{\vq}_{i, (0, 0)} \, \psi_{(0, 0)} +
              \hat{\vq}_{i, (1, 0)} \, \psi_{(1, 0)} +
              \hat{\vq}_{i, (0, 1)} \, \psi_{(0, 1)} \\
    {} + {} & \hat{\vq}_{i, (1, 1)} \, \psi_{(1, 1)} +
              \hat{\vq}_{i, (2, 0)} \, \psi_{(2, 0)} +
              \hat{\vq}_{i, (0, 2)} \, \psi_{(0, 2)}
  \end{split}
\end{equation}
where the coefficients $\set{\hat{\vq}_{i \vj}}$ are vectors with two elements
corresponding to the two processing elements. Regarding the basis,
\begin{align*}
  & \psi_{(0, 0)}(\vz) = 1, \\
  & \psi_{(1, 0)}(\vz) = 2 z_1, \\
  & \psi_{(0, 1)}(\vz) = 2 z_2, \\
  & \psi_{(1, 1)}(\vz) = 4 z_1 z_2 \\
  & \psi_{(2, 0)}(\vz) = \frac{15}{4} z_1^2 - \frac{3}{4}, \text{ and} \\
  & \psi_{(0, 2)}(\vz) = \frac{15}{4} z_2^2 - \frac{3}{4}.
\end{align*}
The Jacobi polynomials have two parameters \cite{xiu2010}, and the ones shown
above correspond to the case where both parameters are equal to two. Such a
series can be shorter or longer, depending on the accuracy requirements given by
\lc. The expansion of power has the same structure but different coefficients.

The next step is to compute the coefficients of power $\set{\hat{\vp}_{i \vj}}$
in \eref{chaos-recurrence}, which subsequently yield the coefficients of
temperature $\set{\hat{\vq}_{i \vj}}$. As discussed in
\sref{chaos-construction}, these computations involve multidimensional
integration with respect to the distribution of \vz, and they should be
performed numerically using an adequate quadrature $\quadrature{\nz}{\lq}$. When
beta distributions are involved, the natural choice is Gauss--Jacobi
quadratures, which belong to the class of Gaussian quadratures introduced in
\xref{numerical-integration}. Given $\quadrature{\nz}{\lq}$, the coefficients
are computed as shown in \eref{chaos-coefficient}. It is important to note that
\lq should be chosen in such a way that the quadrature is exact for polynomials
of total order up to at least $2 \lc$, that is, twice the level of \ac{PC}
expansions, which is discussed in \sref{chaos-construction}. Consequently, $\lq
\geq \lc$, since the quadrature is Gaussian.

To summarize, we have completed four out of five stages of the proposed
framework depicted in \fref{chaos-overview}. The result is a lightweight
surrogate for the entire system. At each time step, the surrogate is composed of
two \np-valued polynomials---one is for power, and the other one for
temperature---which are defined in terms of \nz mutually independent random
variables.

\subsection{Post-Processing}

At Stage~4 in \fref{chaos-overview}, the constructed expansions are utilized in
order to assist the designer in analyzing the impact of process variation on
power- and temperature-related characteristics of the system that is being
developed. Consider, for example, \eref{chaos-expansion-example}. It can be seen
that the surrogate model has a negligibly small computational cost: for any
outcome of \vz, one can readily calculate the corresponding temperature by
plugging this outcome into \eref{chaos-expansion-example}; the same applies to
power. Therefore, the representation can be trivially analyzed in order to
retrieve various statistics about the system. Let us illustrate a few of them
using the expansion given in \eref{chaos-expansion-example}.

\inputfigure{chaos-application-power}
\inputfigure{chaos-application-temperature}
Assume that the dynamic power profile $\mp_\dynamic$ is the one shown in
\fref{chaos-application-power}. Having constructed a surrogate with respect to
this profile, we can calculate, for instance, the expectation and variance of
the temperature that the system has at a certain moment in time, which is a
trivial operation given the formulae in \eref{chaos-moments}. For the whole time
span of $\mp_\dynamic$, these quantities are plotted in
\fref{chaos-application-temperature} where the dashed lines correspond to one
standard deviation above the corresponding expectations. The displayed curves
closely match those obtained via \ac{MC} sampling with $\no = 10^4$ samples;
however, our method takes less than a second, whereas \ac{MC} sampling takes
more than a day, which will be discussed further in
\sref{chaos-transient-results}. In addition, the \ac{PDF} of the temperature at
that moment can be estimated. This operation is undertaken by sampling the
surrogate, in which case we might obtain curves similar to those shown in
\fref{chaos-application-density}, which is a part of a different example given
in \sref{chaos-transient-results}.
