Our work makes the following major contributions.

\begin{itemize}

\item
We propose an accurate and fast approach to deterministic dynamic steady-state
temperature analysis and improve deterministic transient temperature analysis.
Leveraging our efficient approach, we develop a reliability-optimization scheme
targeted at reducing the stress caused by thermal cycling and, thereby, at
alleviating performance uncertainty.

\item
We present a versatile statistical framework for inferring the variability of
process parameters across silicon wafers that is induced by the fabrication
process. The key feature of the proposed approach is that it operates on
indirect measurements, which can also be sparse and noisy.

\item
We develop a flexible probabilistic framework for characterizing diverse
system-level quantities of interest that are deteriorated by process variation.
Using our technique, we enhance reliability analysis of computer systems so that
the damaging ramifications of process uncertainty are adequately accounted for
in reliability models, which also leads to a more comprehensive treatment of
performance uncertainty.

\item
We introduce an adept system-level framework for probabilistic analysis of
various quantities that are of interest to the designer but also uncertain due
to the variability induced by digital sources of uncertainty such as workload,
which tends to be less regular than the one originating from analog sources of
uncertainty such as the fabrication process.

\item
We perform an early but insightful investigation of the applicability of the
latest advancements in the field of machine learning to mitigating workload
uncertainty at runtime in the context of resource management and, more
specifically, to the problem of fine-grained long-range forecasting of the
resource usage in large computer systems.

\end{itemize}
