We have presented our experience of working with the state-of-the-art recurrent
neural networks in the context of fine-grained long-range prediction of the
resource usage in a computer cluster. Our workflow---which starts from making
the data readily available for learning and finishes by predicting the resource
usage of individual tasks multiple time steps into the future---has been
described in detail and applied to a large data set of real resource-usage
traces of a computer cluster.

The experimental results suggest that the considered fine-grained traces possess
a certain structure, and that this structure can be extracted by advanced
machine-learning techniques and subsequently utilized for making educated
predictions. This information can be of use to such a crucial component as the
resource manager of the computer cluster in question, allowing the manager to
more intelligently orchestrate the cluster.

In order to facilitate the development of intelligent resource managers of
computer clusters, we investigate the utility of the state-of-the-art neural
networks for the purpose of fine-grained long-range prediction of the resource
usage in one such cluster. We consider a large data set of real-life traces and
describe in detail our workflow, starting from making the data accessible for
learning and finishing by predicting the resource usage of individual tasks
multiple steps ahead. The experimental results indicate that such fine-grained
traces as the ones considered possess a certain structure, and that this
structure can be extracted by advanced machine-learning techniques and
subsequently utilized for making informed predictions.
