\inputfigure{chaos-example}
Consider a quad-core architecture whose leakage current is uncertain to the
designer due to its dependence on a number of process parameters affected by
process variation. Assume first that these parameters have nominal values. We
can then simulate the system under a certain workload and observe the
corresponding temperature profile; the experimental setup is to be detailed in
\sref{chaos-transient-application} and \sref{chaos-transient-results}. The
result is depicted in \fref{chaos-example} by a blue line, which corresponds to
the temperature of one of the processing elements. It can be seen that the
temperature is always below \celsius{90}. Let us now assume a mild deviation of
the process parameters from their nominal values and perform temperature
analysis once again. The result is the orange line in \fref{chaos-example}; the
maximum temperature is approaching \celsius{100}. Finally, we repeat the
experiment considering a severe deviation of the parameters and observe the
yellow line in \fref{chaos-example}; in this case, the maximum temperature is
almost \celsius{110}.

Suppose now that the designer is tuning a solution constrained by a maximum
temperature of \celsius{90}, and that the designer is guided exclusively by the
nominal values of the process parameters. In this scenario, even with mild
deviations, the circuits might be burnt. Another path that the designer might
take is to design the system for severe conditions. In this second scenario,
however, the system might easily become too conservative, overdesigned.

The conclusion is that the presence of uncertainty has to be adequately
addressed in order to pursue efficiency and robustness. Nevertheless, the
majority of the literature related to power, temperature, and reliability
analysis of computer systems ignores this important aspect; see, for instance,
\cite{rao2009, rai2011, thiele2011}. This negligence is also present in the
analysis and optimization described in \cref{certainty-development}, and the
goal of this chapter is to eliminate this concern in the case of analog
uncertainty and, in particular, the one induced by process variation.
