Although there are many aspects that are of significance to the design of an
electronic system, our interest revolves primarily around those that are related
to power and temperature for the following reason: power consumption and heat
dissipation are of great importance. Power translates to energy, and energy
translates to hours of battery life and to electricity bills. Temperature, on
the other hand, is one of the major causes of permanent damage \cite{jedec2016},
which necessitates adequate cooling equipment and thereby escalates product
expenses \cite{chaudhry2015}. The situation is complicated even further by the
interdependence between power and temperature, which is discussed in
\sref{power-model} and \sref{power-temperature}: higher power leads to higher
temperature, and higher temperature to higher power \cite{liu2007}.
Consequently, taking power and temperature into consideration is key to
achieving effectiveness, efficiency, and robustness.

In the following, we consider temperature analysis; it is important to realize,
however, that power analysis is inseparable from temperature analysis due to the
aforementioned power-temperature interplay. Hence, power analysis is always
implied whenever we discuss temperature analysis, and vice versa.

There are two types of temperature analysis: \one~transient analysis and
\two~steady-state analysis. The first records the temperatures that the system
under consideration traverses in an arbitrary time interval starting from an
arbitrary initial condition when it is exposed to a spatially and temporally
arbitrary power distribution. The second records the temperature that the system
attains and retains once it has reached a thermal equilibrium under a power
distribution that is spatially arbitrary but temporally constant or repeating.

Steady-state analysis can be further classified into two categories: \one~static
analysis and \two~dynamic analysis. The first is concerned with temporally
constant power distributions, that is, with those that do not change over time.
In this case, the resulting temperature distributions do not change over time
either. The second is concerned with temporally arbitrary power distributions
that are periodic, that is, with those that repeat with a certain periodicity.
In this case, the resulting temperature distributions change over time with the
same periods as the corresponding repeating power distributions. The scenario
being considered is that the system is exposed to a periodic workload or to a
workload that can be approximated as periodic. Prominent examples that have such
periodic behaviors are various multimedia applications.
