Temperature analysis of computer systems is chiefly based on the duality between
the transfer of heat and the transfer of electric charge \cite{kreith2000}. The
core idea is to construct a so-called thermal \up{RC} circuit for the system
under consideration \cite{skadron2003}. Such a circuit is a collection of
thermal nodes that are characterized by thermal capacitances and connected with
each other via thermal resistances. The circuit is to capture the relevant
physical structure and thermal properties of the system and, thereby, to model
the system's thermal dynamics.

A thermal \up{RC} circuit can also be constructed at different levels of
granularity, which primarily refers to the number thermal nodes, denoted by \nn,
and their placement. It should be noted that the chosen granularity has a
profound impact on the accuracy of the subsequent temperature analysis.

\inputfigure{thermal-circuit}
In order to give a better intuition about thermal \up{RC} circuits,
\fref{thermal-circuit} depicts a simplified example of such a circuit
constructed for a dual-core chip equipped with a thermal package composed of a
thermal interface material, heat spreader, and heat sink. Each of the \np
processing elements is represented by one thermal node, and the thermal
interface material, heat spreader, and heat sink are captured by \np, $\np + 4$,
and $\np + 8$ nodes, respectively. Therefore, $\nn = 4 \times \np + 12$. In this
particular example, $\np = 2$ and $\nn = 20$. The construction principle
described above is the one presented in \cite{huang2008}, and it is also the one
that is used throughout this thesis unless stated otherwise.

Suppose now that an adequate thermal \up{RC} circuit has been constructed for
the considered computer system. Regardless of the structure of the circuit, the
thermal dynamics of the circuit and, therefore, the computer system are governed
by the following system of \nn differential and \np algebraic equations, which
is based on Fourier's law \cite{fourier2009}:
\begin{subnumcases}{\elab{temperature-model-original}}
  \m{C} \frac{\d \tvs(t)}{\d t} + \m{G} \tvs(t) = \tm{B} \vp(t) \elab{temperature-differential-original} \\
  \vq(t) = \transpose{\tm{B}} \tvs(t) + \vq_\ambient \elab{temperature-algebraic-original}
\end{subnumcases}
where $\vq \in \real^\np$, $\vq_\ambient \in \real^\np$, and $\vp \in \real^\np$
are the operating temperature, ambient temperature, and power consumption of the
processing elements, respectively. Further, $\tvs \in \real^\nn$ represents the
state of the thermal nodes, and $\m{C} \in \real^{\nn \times \nn}$ and $\m{G}
\in \real^{\nn \times \nn}$ are a diagonal matrix of the thermal capacitance and
a symmetric and positive-definite matrix of the thermal conductance,
respectively. Lastly, $\tm{B} \in \real^{\nn \times \np}$ is a mapping between
the processing elements and the thermal nodes, which, without loss of
generality, is assumed to be a rectangular diagonal matrix whose diagonal
elements are equal to unity.

In general, the differential part in \eref{temperature-differential-original} is
nonlinear due to the source term \vp since we do not make any assumptions about
its structure; see the discussion in \sref{power-model}. Therefore, there is no
closed-form solution to the system.
