Computer systems are omnipresent and omniscient. They penetrate deep into
everyday life and are unsettlingly indispensable and increasingly intelligent at
the tasks entrusted to them. It is then readily understandable that the design
of computer systems is an acutely difficult and vastly far-reaching process.

One major concern of the designer of a computer system is the presence of
uncertainty, which, in many cases, is inherent and inevitable. A prominent
source of uncertainty is process variation: the process parameters of fabricated
nanoscale devices deviate from their nominal values since the contemporary
fabrication process cannot be controlled precisely down to the level of
individual atoms. Another source is performance variation: the performance of
the system under consideration degrades over time due to natural or accelerated
wear. Yet another and arguably the most consequential source of uncertainty is
workload variation: the actual runtime workload that the system will be exposed
to in a production environment is rarely, if ever, known in advance.

Uncertainty can lead to degradation of the quality and efficiency of service in
the best case and to severe faults or burnt silicon in the worst-case scenario.
Therefore, it is crucial to acknowledge and analyze uncertainty and to mitigate
its deteriorating consequences by designing computer systems that are well aware
of and well equipped to effectively and efficiently tackle uncertainty.

As the first step, we consider deterministic techniques for analyzing certain
aspects of computer systems. These techniques do not take uncertainty into
account; however, they serve as a foundation for those that do. Our attention
revolves primarily around temperature analysis as temperature is of central
importance for ensuring robustness and energy efficiency. We develop a novel and
fast approach to dynamic steady-state temperature analysis of multiprocessor
systems and apply it in the context of reliability optimization.

We then proceed to developing stochastic techniques for analyzing computer
systems. These techniques do take uncertainty into account.
