Temperature analysis of electronic systems is chiefly based on the duality
between the transfer of heat and the transfer of electric charge
\cite{kreith2000}. The core idea is to construct a so-called thermal \up{RC}
circuit for the system under consideration \cite{skadron2003}. Such a circuit is
a collection of thermal nodes that are characterized by thermal capacitances and
connected with each other via thermal resistances. The circuit is to capture the
relevant physical structure and thermal properties of the system and, thereby,
to model the system's thermal dynamics.

A thermal \up{RC} circuit can also be constructed at different levels of
granularity, which primarily refers to the number thermal nodes, denoted by \nn,
and their placement. It should be noted that the chosen granularity has a
profound impact on the accuracy of the subsequent temperature analysis.

\inputfigure{thermal-circuit}
In order to give a better intuition about thermal \up{RC} circuits,
\fref{thermal-circuit} depicts a simplified example of such a circuit
constructed for a dual-core chip equipped with a thermal package composed of a
thermal interface material, heat spreader, and heat sink. Each of the \np
processing elements is represented by one thermal node, and the thermal
interface material, heat spreader, and heat sink are captured by \np, $\np + 4$,
and $\np + 8$ nodes, respectively. Therefore, $\nn = 4 \times \np + 12$. In this
particular example, $\np = 2$ and $\nn = 20$. The construction principle
described above is the one presented in \cite{huang2008}, and it is also the one
that is used throughout this thesis unless stated otherwise.

Suppose now that an adequate thermal \up{RC} circuit has been constructed for
the considered electronic system. Regardless of the structure of the circuit,
the thermal dynamics of the circuit and, therefore, the electronic system are
governed by the following system of \nn differential and \np algebraic
equations, which is based on Fourier's law \cite{fourier2009}:
\begin{subnumcases}{\elab{temperature-model-original}}
  \m{C} \frac{\d \tvs(t)}{\d t} + \m{G} \tvs(t) = \tm{B} \vp(t) \elab{temperature-differential-original} \\
  \vq(t) = \transpose{\tm{B}} \tvs(t) + \vq_\ambient \elab{temperature-algebraic-original}
\end{subnumcases}
where $\vq \in \real^\np$, $\vq_\ambient \in \real^\np$, and $\vp \in \real^\np$
are vectors of the operating temperature, ambient temperature, and power
dissipation of the processing elements, respectively. Further, $\tvs \in
\real^\nn$ represents the state of the thermal nodes, and $\m{C} \in \real^{\nn
\times \nn}$ and $\m{G} \in \real^{\nn \times \nn}$ are a diagonal matrix of the
thermal capacitance and a symmetric and positive-definite matrix of the thermal
conductance, respectively. Lastly, $\tm{B} \in \real^{\nn \times \np}$ is a
mapping between the processing elements and the thermal nodes, which, without
loss of generality, is assumed to be a rectangular diagonal matrix whose
diagonal elements are equal to unity.

In general, the differential part in \eref{temperature-differential-original} is
nonlinear due to the source term \vp since we do not make any assumptions about
its structure; see the discussion in \sref{power-model}. Therefore, there is no
closed-form solution to the system.

It can be seen in \eref{temperature-model-original} that the input to
temperature analysis is power, and the output is temperature. For practical
computations, these quantities should be discrete. To this end, we introduce the
notions of a power and a temperature profile. A power profile of the system is
defined to be an $\np \times \ns$ matrix
\[
  \mp
  = \left(\range{\vp_1}{\vp_\ns}\right)
  = \left(\range{\vp(t_1)}{\vp(t_\ns)}\right) \in \real^{\np \times \ns}
\]
that contains \ns samples of the power consumption of the \np processing
elements over \ns time steps with a certain sampling interval \dt. Similarly, a
temperature profile is defined to be an $\np \times \ns$ matrix
\begin{equation} \elab{temperature-profile}
  \mq
  = \left(\range{\vq_1}{\vq_\ns}\right)
  = \left(\range{\vq(t_1)}{\vq(t_\ns)}\right) \in \real^{\np \times \ns}
\end{equation}
that captures the heat dissipation of the processing elements over a number of
equidistant time moments. Let us note that, even though the exact time frame and
sampling interval of a power or a temperature profile are not included in the
above notation, they are typically understood from the context.
